---
title: "Remember "
slug: "remember"
date: 2025-01-27
categories: ["Opinion"]
excerpt: "The following is a piece that I wrote on the eve of completing my coursework for my studies in Computer Science, originally published Jan. 27, 2020."
heroImage: "/images/overcoming.jpg"
originalUrl: "https://mjswrites.com/blog/f/remember"
---

The following is a piece that I wrote on the eve of completing my coursework for my studies in Computer Science, [originally published Jan. 27, 2020.](https://mjjournalism.wordpress.com/2020/01/27/remember/)  
I want you to remember this moment. The feeling that your potential is unbridled, your world – open and full of new experiences. The years leading up to this have all been in preparation for what is to come. Work, friends, school, travel. All of this lies ahead. Now is the time to hold your feet to the fire, to see how many of your aspirations and dreams can be realized. And you do have dreams. They may not always be clear, but they are there. They are there to be a guiding light, to be a beacon for the hopes of the future. Now, this is your time.  
All of the challenges that face the world are also your challenges. As a person of privilege, you have a solemn obligation to fight them. You have the skills to do so, but your mindset may be wrong. Problems like this are not solved so quickly. Just as you do not scale mountains in one leap, you do not solve problems all at once. Break them down, analyze them, apply what you know, and recognize what you don’t. Don’t stop learning, don’t stop moving. At the end of the day, you should be physically drained, but mentally inspired. Set your soul ablaze, and let it shine for all to see. Bear your feelings, speak your mind, do what you must do. It is time to grow up, to admit that it will be tough, but that there is no backing down.  
You must relish the tribulations to come, for what is life without heartbreak? What is sunshine without rain, peace without war, love without heartbreak. Draw on these dichotomies, just as you have so many times before. Maybe, just maybe, the all-or-nothing mentality will serve you well. Be cautious in this approach, for it may yield unsavory results. Stand tall in the face of adversity. Ensure that you always prioritize equality, and recognize inequality. Serve those who have less, and strive to emulate those who have more. In this world of capitalism and commodity, you must chase these things sometimes. Alas, the only way to empower others is to first empower yourself.  
Your mind is your greatest gift. Do not waste it. Express it, share it, open it to everything around you. Write, listen, speak. Do all of the things that you can do, and pursue the things that you can’t. Find what you love, and do it. Devote time to honing your craft, to adding to your skillset. Equip yourself for your struggles. Reach for the stars when your heart starts to ache. Be lavish in your praise, and share your feelings. To inspire greatness, tell others that they are great. To receive honesty, be honest. To promote kindness, reward those who have shown it to you. These simple principles must be your guiding light.  
I want you to remember this moment. On the tough nights, and the early mornings. During the breakups and first dates. On graduation night, and on the nights filled with frustration. The world needs you, and you must never forget this. How can you mean something to the world if the world doesn’t mean something to you? Feel with all of your heart, and fight with all of your soul. You will make it.  
Alas, you have no other choice.
