---
title: "The Desecration of Democracy"
slug: "the-desecration-of-democracy"
date: 2025-03-15
categories: ["Opinion"]
excerpt: "We are witnessing the unbridled desecration of democracy in the United States. It has become clearer than ever before that Trump is not only incapable of executing the duties required of him as President of the United St..."
heroImage: "/images/trump-tesler.webp"
originalUrl: "https://mjswrites.com/blog/f/the-desecration-of-democracy"
---

We are witnessing the unbridled desecration of democracy in the United States. It has become clearer than ever before that Trump is not only incapable of executing the duties required of him as President of the United States, but is an active and devastating threat to our sovereignty, freedoms, and future as a nation.  
#### A Nation in Free Fall  
It is nearly a daily occurrence that the Trump administration infringes on the rights of the American people. In recent weeks, we have seen significant rollbacks in the right to freedom of speech, freedom of the press, the right to assembly, as well as blatant acts of corruption for all the world to see. Fascism is no longer a potential threat - it is the *modus operandi* of an administration and political system that stands to erode hundreds of years of progress in a nation that once stood as a beacon of hope, freedom, and opportunity, even for those outside of our borders.  
In recent days, a peaceful protestor, Mahmoud Khalil, was arrested in what was a clear abuse of power and infringement of his rights at the behest of the President of the United States. By definition of the First Amendment of the Constitution, Khalil has the right to freedom of speech and the right to assembly, both of which he used in order to fight the tyranny of an Israeli government that is currently waging a genocide on men, women, and children of Palestine. Although Khalil holds a Green Card, the authorities originally arrested him on the premise that his student visa had been revoked; once they had recognized their mistake, they erroneously claimed that his Green Card had been revoked as well. Then, an innocent man was forcibly separated from his pregnant wife, and spirited away to an undisclosed location to be unlawfully detained. These actions are demonstrative of a president with disdain for the rights and freedoms of those who defy him and his authoritarian regime. Furthermore, Khalil's persecution comes just weeks after [over 1,500 violent insurrectionists were granted blanket pardons](https://www.npr.org/2025/01/30/nx-s1-5276336/donald-trump-jan-6-rape-assault-pardons-rioters) by the same President, and [NAZIs were permitted to openly walk the streets](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/armed-neo-nazis-get-police-protection-black-residents-ohio-express-dis-rcna191794) and spew vitriol and hatred with impunity. This is what fascists do, and our president is not only condoning this behavior, but utilizing his executive power for retribution against his opponents.  
At the same time, the world's richest man, who spent hundreds of millions of dollars to influence the election, supports extremist groups in Germany, performed a NAZI salute ***twice*** at the inauguration, and transformed the White House lawn into a make-shift Tesla dealership with the aid of the president, appears to have free reign to strip American citizens of their employment, their privacy, their right to government programs funded by their tax dollars, and more. These actions are not only egregious violations of the values of our sovereign nation, they have the propensity to wreak havoc upon the futures of American citizens without recourse to defend themselves against this unprovoked assault on freedom. Veterans, educators, students, civil servants, farmers, immigrants, low-income Americans - all face existential threats at the hands of Elon Musk.  
Similar to the role that Joseph Goebbels played in Hitler's regime, the United States Press Secretary has likewise embarked on a crusade against the truth, and has become little more than a conduit for the president to sow misinformation and censor the press. When independent journalists are barred from reporting on the actions of the Commander in Chief simply because they challenge him and his false narratives, it is safe to say that freedom of the press has been revoked. The repetition of bald-faced lies on the cataclysmic effects of tariffs and trade wars, as well as the propensity of this administration to support dictators like Vladimir Putin in their assault against the sovereignty of Ukraine, an American ally, are clear indicators that not only does this administration hold ambitions to implement an authoritarian government in this country, but they will betray their friends in order to allow likeminded regimes to do the same. We have seen this story play out in history again and again, and it seems that there are still Americans who have not learned from these fatal lessons of history, and continue to support an American President with ambitions to warp our republic into a dictatorship.  
Even more-disturbing are the continued signs that Trump is not intellectually or morally capable of leading this country. Some of Trump's closest advisors have used words like 'moron', 'idiot', and 'immoral' to describe the President, as well as labeling him 'a threat' to the United States. Trump lacks a basic understanding of nearly everything that his administration is working to implement. He doesn't understand what a tariff is. He doesn't understand why trade wars will never bring prosperity to our nation. He doesn't understand the importance of alliances with historic allies of the United States. He doesn't understand the dangers of climate change. Most importantly, he is incapable of understanding any of the challenges of his constituents, because he was born into wealth, insulated from danger, and has used his power to evade the consequences of his legal transgressions, including rape, fraud, and, of course, his 34 unpunished felonies.  
It appears as though America may have reached a point of no return as it slips precipitously into fascism, destruction, and collapse. We have all been condemned to watch as the freedoms supposedly endowed by our creator are trampled, our economy collapses, and the malignant narcissism of our president makes him incapable of reversing course to restore order and democracy to the United States. The rest of the world, likewise, looks on with a confused mixture of fear, curiosity, and begrudging amusement as one of the world's greatest nations and stewards of democracy casts away the principles upon which it was built.  
I weep for this nation. I fear for tomorrow. I resent the cowardice of those in positions of power who consistently fail to stand up to these flagrant violations of our rights. I stand with conviction that all who have allowed, and continue to allow, this morally bankrupt man to lead us astray will be sentenced to a lifetime of shame, and the knowledge that their actions against the American people constitute treason.  
More than this, my heart aches for those who find themselves victims, and my admiration for those ordinary citizens who continue to protest and defy this evil in the face of unjust consequence persists. You will find yourselves on the right side of history.  
To desecrate our democracy is to proclaim yourself an enemy of this nation. May history have mercy on your souls, and may the present leave you bereft of the ability to shield yourselves from the ridicule that you rightly deserve.
